Uh.
Hello Ariya. Good morning.
So just to remind you again, I
mean if you have any problem or
issues you can communicate with Ariya. Ariya is the moderator of our
lectures and office hours. So or
if you put a question and I
missed your question, you can simply ask Ariya to remind me
about your question. So let me
share my screen.
Share my screen.
So if you have any questions
regarding the I mean labs that
were I mean yesterday or any
question about the assignments
and etc you can, I'm ready to
take your questions. Basically
the material in the lecture
assignments where most of them
gonna be covered today.
And I tried to cover all the
topics so that you can answer
them, but again, there are
just only you can have the
option to select two of the
questions to answer and.
And regarding the labs, I hope
that you all could successfully
install an environment for
coding and see the environment
doesn't matter for us as long as
we can build and run your
program. That's good for us, but
in the lab instructions, because
I just wanted to illustrate and
help provide some sample, I
assume that the eclipse here are
default environment, but there's
no, I mean.
Mandate about that so you can
use any other, I mean
environment for coding on C,
even for instance in Notepad. Or
adjust the text editor in Linux
so you can use nano to write
your program and then compile it
and build your program.
So I have a question, is today
is still considered lecture two?
Yes, actually the number of
lectures and labs all are based
on the week number. So in the
first week which was last week,
it was lecture 01. So it was
disturbed and this week is our
second week. So we have lab 02.
We have lecture 02 and yes.
We still need have to do this
set of things since.
See the first, yes, I mean that
that was the error of the
eclipse, so sometimes well.
If you want to run or debug
program inside the eclipse, it's
better to set buffer off, but
you can remove that code. I mean
that command and build your
program and run it from the
shell, so as long as you are
running from the show that I
mean everything works fine. So
that's the debugger in the
weakness of the eclipse but.
I I I suggest you to put
that line because for our
programs it doesn't have any
negative impact.
So.
let let's start so.
Again, good morning everyone so
far. What do we need to hand in
for the lab just to see file in
the lab manual we explained what
are the deliveries? So in the
end of the lab manual explained
you have to zip all your files
in a single file and then what
are the content? For instance
the folder for your project, the
image of your run etc. So you
have to look at the.
At the deliverables
section of the manual.
A four hour course. The default
languages see, but if you could
write in C++, that's fine, but
the default is C, so our mark
are gonna build your program by
the C compiler. If you run a
code. If you build a, uh, I
mean, write a code in C++ in
your report, which is optional.
But because you have to tell the
market that my code is in C++,
you have to remind the market
about your compiler. So in the
report. Just explain that your
code is in C++ and use the C++
compiler to do that. To compile
the code so the report is
optional for those that doesn't
need any explanation, but for
those that needs explanation you
have to put in your report.
Yes, as I said, I mean you are
going to write the C++, but
again you have to explain that
in the report so that the marker
know that your program is in C++
and use the C++ compiler.
Yes, GCC is for the C compiler
and also yes, that's that's the
default compiler in Linux
systems or in Mac.
Solve. You can put your question
in the chat box and are you
gonna schedule them, but I'm I'm
going to start the new topics
and will be back with your
question. So so far we explained
that number systems involved
with the history and the last
number system that was efficient
was the base 4, meaning that we
have a Four Symbols 0123.
And then, oh wait, the
recordings already started
some Aria.
I was about to forget
about that so.
The base four. Basically we add
a positions to the left and this
positions has significant based
on the powers of four.
So that was more efficient than
the Hussein system that you add
positions, but the position
doesn't have any significance.
So you could ask that we could
increase the base number, for
instance more than four or less
than. Or you can decrease the
base number to less than four,
so that's why we have some
common numbering systems, and we
want to just showcase some
samples of them. So, but in
abstract you can choose any base
number from 123 up until any I
mean number. But there are some
of them that very common in.
A computer science.
The most immediate one is that.
After the honor system, you
can have binary system.
Binary system has two
symbols, zero and one.
And if you add positions, they
have significance of powers of
two. So base two radix two or
binary systems, the largest
digit is 1, the lowest digit is
0. And here is an example.
If you are given a stream of
binary numbers, binary digits
1010, and if you want to know
what is the exact decimal number
or what is the actual value of
this number, you have to simply.
First, figure out the
significant of his position
from the lowest. I mean
lowest significant position
to higher significant
position.
So we have 8 positions, 2 to the
power of 0, two to the power of
1 up until 2 to the power of 7.
And then you have to multiply
each digit of each position to
the significant of that
position as you see here 1 by 2
to the power of 0, zero to the
power of two to power, one 1 *
2 to the power of two and etc.
And then some altogether. So
multiply each digit to the
significant and then some
together. So this binary number
is equal 273 in decimal system.
If you are given this number,
one thing we use. I mean, we
usually forget, but that's an
important step is.
So I got an emergency alert.
Sorry about that.
So you have to 1st check that
the digits are valid digit in
that system or no. So in binary
system the digits are zero and
one. So if you see a digit that
is more than one, it means that
that number is not a valid
number in that system. So here
we have 3233. These are not
valid digits in binary system,
so we cannot see what's the
actual value in decimal system.
Simply have to say this number
is not valid.
So again, remember first
check the number is valid or
not and then try to convert
it to the decimal system.
So if you want to count in
binary numbers, uh, you are
assumed that you assume that
there are only four positions.
So my question from you is this,
what's the minimum number?
We can put the answer in
the chat box.
Based on what we said in the
last lecture, uh, the minimum
number is just putting the
lowest digit in all positions.
So yes, basically 0000 just put
all the in the in the whole
position. Stated. What's
the maximum number?
The maximum number is putting
the largest digit in all
positions right? Everyone
actually put in the correct
answer, but if you want to
convert the largest number which
is 1111 in decimal system, last
section we come up with a
formula. He said that if you are
given an position, the largest
digit is. That radix number to
the power of N -- 1 because if
you multiply each digit to the
power of the significant and
then sum, it becomes a John
metric series. So here the
largest digit is equal to what
value in decimal system?
So you have to simply want
to multiply by to the power
of 0, one to the power
multiplied by two to the
power of 1 and etc. So in
sum it becomes 2 to the
power of 4 because we have
four position minus one
which is equal to.
15 so 2 to the power of 4 -- 1
do not forget about that minus.
So basically counting is that
each number plus one. So you
start from 012 an etc. So at
some point if you reach a number
this 1011 and if you want to
convert it to decimal system,
you just multiply each digit to
the significant of the position.
So this number is equal to. This
is 8 + 3, which becomes 12. This
number is 12 + 1. It must be end
up with the 13, but in binary
system. So this sum with one is
exactly the same as the decimal
system you already know in high
school, so each digit 1 + 1
becomes 2. But two is not a
valid number. You have to
divide 2 by the base number.
So 2 / 2 becomes one and the
remainder is 0. So you leave
the remainder as the result
and then you put the quotient.
The integer a result of the
division as a carry to the next
position. And then you continue
with submission. So 1 + 1 + 0
becomes 2SO2 again is not a
valid digit, so you have to
divide by best number one as a
carry on their remainder. As a
result, this is exactly as we do
in the decimal system.
And then the next is 1 + 0
+ 0, becomes one, and then
1 + 0 becomes one. So this
way we end up with the new
number 15 after 12.
So.
The next common number system,
base two. We already covered
the base four and so binary
system, Quaternary system and
the next common number system
is base eight. It doesn't mean
that we don't have any base
seven or base six or base
five. We do have those basis,
but these are common.
The next space is the best. It
is also called octal number
system. Basically we have the
digits from zero, one up until
seven. You see that the largest
digit is always the radix number
minus one. So.
If you are given this number in
base age in order to see what's
the value you have to 1st with,
see whether this is a valid
number, so all the digits are
between zero up until seven. So
this is a valid number, and then
you have to figure out what's
the significance of the
positions 8. The power of 01 up
until the last highest
significant position, 8 to the
power of 7, and then multiply
each digit to the significant of
that position and then some.
So it's about this number in
this is 30302131 in octal system
is equal to 6 million. Something
in decimal system.
This is another example, but
again I put this example just to
show you another invalid number.
So here if you check the number,
there are two numbers that are
not lazy, typo here.
So.
This was either 9 or 8 is not a
valid digit because for base
eight the valid digit is between
zero up until seven. So the
radix number itself is not a
valid digit. Also, this one.
This is not a correct symbol
in base eight, so this is not
a valid number.
Another example is this. This is
the same binary number that we
already saw. It's equal to 173
in binary system, but let's see
what's the decimal value for
this in base 8.
So the same number but in base 8
system. So again you have to
multiply each digit by the
significant of that position and
sum. So this number was 173 in
binary system, but it is equal
to 2 million something in base
8. And this is because.
The significance of the position
here is based on the powers of
eight, but in binary system was
based on the powers of two.
So you see that how
increasing the base number
allows us to represent a
wider range of numbers.
So here is the comparison.
The same number, the same
number of positions on the
same digits, but if you change
the base, if you increase the
base, you increase the actual
value of that number.
So if you want to count in base
eight again the minimum value is
just putting the lowest digit in
all positions, so the minimum
value is just 0000, which is
equal to 0.
But what is the largest number
the largest number is just
putting the largest digit in all
positions, so the largest digit
in base eight is 7777 correct?
And neeraj? But if you want
to see this number 7777 in
decimal system, what's the equal
value in decimal system?
What what was our formula in
last lecture reset? We said
that if you are given an
position and you are in base
or it is equal to based the
power of number of position
minus one, so here it becomes.
Let's come here and
calculate that so it
becomes 8 to the power of,
uh, how many positions we
have. You have four
position minus one.
So it is equal to 4000 something
in this 8.
The this is the maximum number
given a four position in base 8.
Correct, yes, correct, you join.
So let's continue.
So if you want again if you want
to count in any basis, basically
you have to add the number one
the unit 1 in the previous
number. So you start from zero
and then 123 up until for
instance, if you reach this
number 5277, you have to simply
add by one in order to reach the
next unit. The next number. So
the same in the decimal system.
So you have to just simply.
At each digit by the 0001.
So 7 + 1 becomes 88 is not the
correct digit valid digit in
base eight, so you have to
divide 8 by the base number. So
again you produce a carry to the
next position and then you put
the remainder as a result.
And then again you continue
1 + 7 + 0 becomes 8, again,
8 / 8 becomes one, and the
remainder is 0. So you put
the zero as the result and
then put the quotient as the
carry to the next position.
And then 1 + 2 + 0 becomes
three, 5 + 0 becomes 5.
And then the next number is 5300
plus one, which becomes 5301.
Oh Part 8 to the power of 4 -- 1
is is the largest digit in base
8. So if you are, you said
that if you are given N
positions, the largest digit
number is putting the largest
digit in each position, which
is equal to the base number to
the power of the number of
position minus one. We covered
this last lecture.
OK.
So. And then X is the most
common number. System is the
decimal system or base 10 in
base 10 you have 10 digits from
zero up until 9:00. So remember,
the largest digit is the radix
number minus one again. So the
number of digits are 1010 digits
from zero up until 9.
And this was the most
sophisticated. A numbering
system that human individuals
actually could reach within the
history. So for instance, in
Western culture, Eastern
cultures in Roman Empire they
had their own decimal system. I
believe this is let me see.
This is a.
Bangaly
decimal digits. And this
is Malaysia at the language from
Malaysia. This is from Fi, I
mean Thailand and this is
Chinese. The decimal digits. An
interesting thing is that all
these systems except the Roman
decimal systems have 0.
You know, in Western eastern, in
Chinese, in Bengali tie, these
are all have a digit 40. Up
until the digit four 910 digits.
So I believe that all of you
know how to convert a
decimal number to the
decimal system, basically.
Just again, the significance are
based on the powers of 10 and
then you multiply and then some.
And it's not. I mean, that is
strange that you end up with the
same number, so 30302131 becomes
30,000,000 something. So
because although our previous
numbering system in order for
us to understand what's the
actual value become really the
decimal system. So when we are
in a decimal system, if you
convert it, you end up with
the same number.
So this is the same
binary number.
10101101 but this time we are
in the base 10 or decimal
system. If you convert it to
the decimal number, you end up
with the same exact number. So
this binary number becomes
10,000,000 something.
And again, if you compare these
at the same number.
As you see, the same
representation with a position
the same digits.
Uh, if you increase the
base, you increase the value
of that number, so from
binary system this number is
equal to 173 in base added
to come 2 million, but in
base 10 it becomes
10,000,000 something and
this is because you are
increasing the significant
of the positions from 2:00
to 8:00 and then to 10.
Again, if you see a number that
has a digit that is not 01 up
until nine, it means that that
number is not a valid number.
Here, for instance, you see a
digit which is a. A is not a
valid symbol or digit in base
10. So you simply say that this
is not a valid in base 10.
However, it might be a valid
number in other numbering
system. Such as uh will
introduce that, but.
If you want to count in decimal,
I believe that you already know
how to count in decimal system
from the secondary school. Or I
mean from the high school you
know how to.
Count again like other base
number, not make system. The
minimum value is just putting
the lowest digit 0000 in all
positions. But the largest is
putting the largest digit so
9999 which becomes 9999.
All but I mean after introducing
the I mean the computer
environment, the computing
power, computer machines and
etc. So we need to represent
very large numbers even. I mean,
if you want to represent those
large numbers in base 10, it
seems that you need a lot of
position to represent those high
numbers. And the same as we did
for from base two to base four
and then to base eight and etc.
We said that if we increase the
base number, we can reduce the
number of positions we need to
represent an number. So that was
the initiative behind building
base number based numbering
system that have larger based
numbers. For instance, after the
decimal system we could build
base eleven, base 12 an etc. But
one of the most common.
All numbering system that have
more than 10 digits or
hexadecimal or I mean in uh in
short heads that system.
Which has 16 digits. Hexa means
16 in English. So in this
system we have 16 digits 0120.
There's another bug here.
2345 up until 9.
And then after nine we have a
digit called a with four, 10 B
411 up until F 4:15. So the
largest digit in this Heizer
decimal system is F, which has
the equal value as 15.
So 16 -- 1 becomes 15.
We represent 15 as F
in hexadecimal system.
So very similar to the exactly
the same as previous numbering
system. If you are given a
number, first you have to check
the digits are valid in the base
16. All the digits are valid
digits and then you have to
simply multiply each digit by
the significant of that position
and then sum together.
You might ask that how I can
multiply a with 16 to the power
of five in this position. As I
said, a is one step after 9, so
9 + 1 becomes 10. So you are
actually you, although you
represent it as the character a,
but the actual value is 10, so
you have to simply multiply 10
by this number.
And then the final number is 815
million something. So you see
that. If you increase the
base number, you increase
the the range that you
represent the numbers.
For other.
Uh. Digits in base 16. For
instance, the digit EB is one
step after a, which is 11. C is
one step after B, which is 12 up
until F, which is one step after
E which is equal to 15.
So although you put the digit F,
But when you want to convert it
to decimal system, you assume
that it is representing 15.
This is the exact binary number
we saw in the base two base
eight and base 10. Now we want
to see what's the decimal value
when we see this number in base
16. So if you do the
calculation, you see that this
number is equal to 269 million
something. So again.
In compared with other numbering
system, the same number now can
represent a larger number.
So if you increase the base,
you're increasing the value
of that number.
From base 273 up until this.
So. This, this way you see that
how can we come up with an more
efficient number system by
increasing the base?
If you want to represent person
173 in base two, you need eight
position. But if you want to
represent the same number in
base 16, you only need probably
just how many positions do you
need. You can attack with that.
Probably you need only.
173 in base 16 will see how can
we convert back a decimal number
to any as base. Any other base
numbers, but you probably need
only two or three positions.
And if you want to count in base
extent very similar, the minimum
number is 0000 in all positions.
The maximum number is just
putting the largest digit. The
largest digit in base 16 years.
What? What is the maximum number
in base 16 given four position?
All silent, yes. Actually you
are given 54 position.
The maximum number is just
putting the largest digit in all
position. The largest digital 16
base is FFFF, so it becomes 4F.
And then. What the value of F is
actually 15 but you have to
represent it as the valid
digits. The valid digits for the
largest digit is F, and then if
you want to convert it to the
decimal system, you have to
simply multiply each digit to
the powers of that position. So
F * 10 to 16 to the power of 0.
So let's do that.
Let's see what's the value
so 16 multiply F.
Multiply by 16.
The power of 0.
Plus
ask 16 to the power of 116 to
the power of 2 and 16 to the
power of 3.
So we said that this number
for the F. We cannot multiply
a character with a number, so
F is actually representing
15. So then you have to
replace F with 15.
The only time that you converted
characters with the actual
numbers is when you want to
convert it to the decimal
system. Otherwise you have to
stick with the valid digits and
let's see what's the value.
The value is 65,000 something
and this is as we said, this is
equal to 16 to the power of
number of positions 5 -- 1.
Oh sorry, the number
of positions are four.
So you see, you end up with
the same number.
This is the formula that
we come up last section.
OK, and again I mean in
accounting in a base 16 is very
I mean exactly the same as any
other basis. So if you start
from 012 an open till for
instance this number 5C AF you
have to just simply add by one.
So you see that F.
Is equal to 15, so F + 1 is
actually means that 15 + 1 which
is equal to 1616 is not a valid
digit. There is no digit for 16,
so you have to divide it by the
base #16. This is the Carrie and
this is the reminder to you.
Leave the remainder and you put
the character the next position.
Is Carrie has the value of 16
and then 1 + 8 A is actually
equal to 10, so 1 + 10 becomes
11 and 11 in base 16 is equal to
B. So you have to replace it
with the character B.
And then C + 0 is equal to C. 5
+ 0 is equal to five, so this is
the next number after 5C AF you
reach 5C Bo.
And then you add this one you
come up with the next number, so
it comes five CB15CB2 and etc.
So any questions so far?
No questions.
So the next kind of I mean.
Strange base number is you can
increase the base number, for
instance based 17, base 18
whatever base number you want
you can. I mean by this.
I mean similar way you can come
up with the any type of number
system. But another amazing base
number is base 64, which is
introduced in 19. Oh, let me.
1992 and the
reason was that they wanted to.
Uh, they need to understand or
to represent or code the
communication in web, and so
they produce a disk space number
and the base number is 64,
meaning that each position has
the significant based on the
powers of 64. And you see that
how wide the numbers we can
represent in this space.
And but the amazing or kind of a
strange thing about this number
is that the digits are. This
space is starting from a.
So a represent the zero.
B represent 1C represent two and
etc up until the capital Z and
then after that small a up until
the small Z and then 012 up
until 9 plus forward slash. So
you see that the largest digit.
Is the digit forward slash.
And this has the value the same
as 64 -- 1 which is 63.
And this is the look up table.
In order to figure out what's
the actual value of each digit.
So again, this system is start
with zero, and if you want to
represent zero you have to put
the digit A.
If you want to show the number
2, you have to put the digits E
for instance. And be careful in
this system, if you put the
digit zero, it doesn't mean
zero. It means 52. This is kind
of a strange binary system, but
I just wanted to show you that.
Whatever symbol you can create
to represent your numbers.
For instance, this is
a number in base 64.
Let's see what's this number. In
order to come up with this
number, you have to 1st see that
the each position has the
significance of 64. So this is
the first position 64 to the
power of 0 up until the last
position 64 to the power of 7.
And then you have to simply
multiply each digit with the
significance of that position.
So how you can multiply plus
with 64 to the power of 0? How
you can multiply edge with 64 to
the power one and etc. So in
order to come up the actual
value of each digit, you have to
refer to the look up table.
So you see that edge has the
value of seven. A has the value
of zero. Small A has the value
of 26 and etc.
At forward Slash has the value
of 63 Plus has a value of 62 and
then. Now you can do the
multiplication so plus 62.
871 is 53, so you see the digit
one, but it has the actual value
of 50. Three in base 64.
And then you do the
multiplication and then sum
together, so this is equal to
this huge number.
I cannot even, I mean, uh.
Uh. Spell this number in words,
but this is that huge number.
An if you want to count in base
64 very similar, you start with
the smallest number. But my
question from you is that what's
the smallest number in base 64?
Correct, so the lowest the
smallest digit is a, so he
Simply put a in all the
positions so it becomes
AAAA, which is equal to 0 in
decimal system. What's the
largest number?
Yes, the largest number is
putting the forward slash in all
positions. So forward slash
forward slash etc.
An if you want to count, you
have to add each number with one
but one in base 64 is equal to a
AAB because it becomes 0001.
So if at some point you reach
this number, you have to add one
with that. So let's start
forward slash plus P.
Forward Slash has the value of
60. Three B is equal to 1, it
becomes 64. 64 is not a valid
digit in base 64. You have to
divide it. Reminder as a result,
the caution as the charity so
they carry, which is equal to 1.
It represents, as the B goes to
the next position and now B + Z
+ A which is exactly equal to 1
+ 25 + 0, which is equal to 26
by 26 is equal too small a.
And this is a valid digit
in base 64, and then you
continue plus.
Added by a becomes 62 + 0 the
same. 26 + 0 The same, so this
is the next number. 8 + A
capital A. So you see that
this is a case sensitive based
number numbering system.
So in general, any numbering
system that introduced positions
that have significant based on
the powers of a number is called
radix. Our number system and
remember who sang system is not
the radix R because the position
doesn't have any significant.
And here I'm also already store
number system called base our
number system. And this is the
general formula for that.
This is the math formula.
Any number N.
In any base.
System with the base number R.
Is equal to this number.
In base 10, so that's an
algorithm to convert any number
in any basis to base 10 decimal
system. And this is the formula
you have to simply multiply each
digit of each position to the
powers of the significant of
that position, which is based on
the powers of R.
And R is the radius number, DI
is the digit at each position.
And remember.
Each put each digit must be
between zero up until or minus
one. The only exception here is
the base 64, which is start from
a up until forward slash. But
again it is just from the value
actual value of 0.63.
And remember, we start from the
02 count, so the first position
has the significance powers of
0. And the last position if you
are given N position, the power
number is N -- 1. So this is I
mean kind of be careful about
this or to the power of 0 up
until the last one or two have N
-- 1. An always the result pace
is based on by this formula.
So these are just I mean, uh.
A additional result of that
formula. The minimum number is
just putting the lowest number
lowest digit in all positions.
So which is equal to 0.
The Max is just putting the
largest digit in all positions.
From the first position up
until the last position,
which is equal to as we said,
it's equal to a geometric
series which is equal to R to
the power of N -- 1.
And the unit of increment is
1. One is that just putting
the one in the lowest position
and then zero with the other
position. So we add 1 by 1 to
reach to the next unit.
So now I'm ready to take your
question, if any so.
Are you? Is there any question?
So let me scroll back to the
chat box how to represent an ad.
And divide in base 64 system
that I you do the same very
similar to the decimal system.
So basically the same algorithm
you use for the division or
multiplication in decimal system
or subtraction. You can use it
in any binary system. The same
will discuss it next week. How
to do arithmetic in basis? Also
how can we have negative
numbers? So far all our numbers
are unsigned, there's no.
Give numbers also, we didn't
discuss addition, subtraction,
etc, but just to give you a
hint, anything is similar to
the decimal system.
I.
So.
Oh, let me open the there is a
A. What files are you
actually prepared for? The
questions? So let me open
that and see the questions.
Thank you how are ya?
Luca asked, is it the number
of stars or electrons are?
This is one thing actually as
the technology actual progress
we need to represent larger
and larger numbers. That's why
we need to introduce new
numbering systems more
efficient in order to pack or
save number of positions.
I.
So discrete is an integer.
Oh oh, let me Scroll down.
I'll let you three. I see now.
Do you still have to do the set
offer? No OK, I can OK.
Mother solve all the digit in
this position. Are we converting
it to the decimal system?
Oh the Knick, ask that we find
the sum of all the digits in
each position we are converting
to decimal system. No no when
you want to add you converted to
the decimal system for your ease
of addition so it just
facilitate your algorithm to do
addition. But when you put the
actual digit you have to put a
valid digit as within the base
64 you see here.
When we want to let me
catch you where we want to
do the audition.
We are, we add forward slash
plus 1 + B but in order in our
mind you have to think of
forward slash as the value of
60, three and V as the value of
1 and then we do the addition.
It comes 64 and then we divide
an etc at the end of the day
when you put the correct digit
you put it digit. You have to
put the correct one so zero if
you put zero in base 64 to
represent the value of zero.
It's wrong. You have to put the
correct digit. So you have to
put A to represent 0.
And.
I actually wrote high asset.
Yes, actually I can. We develope
hosting system to have
requirements of the radix or
that was the that was the idea.
You know we improved the process
system by adding significant to
the positions. So actually the
numbering system is an
improvement of sense system.
So let's is there any
other questions?
OK, let's continue. Since
there's no other questions so
far, all our systems are had
only there were no sign, and
there were no fraction.
All were just the increments.
Unit was just one unit, 1 unit
and etc. But let's back to our
original problem, which was
calculating the distance of moon
to the sun.
We said that we could assume by
some, uh, we can compromise and
we can accept some error in
calculating the distance. And we
could assume. Assume that the
number of the distance is just
five Earth. But if you want
to be more precise, they must
discuss the sun based on this
picture. This is kind of an
imaginary picture.
Which is not only true in
reality, but just for the sake
of our example. It is 1234 and.
1/2 not a whole unit.
So how can we come up with the
numbering system? You see that
we are improving our numbering
system. How can we improve our
numbering system to represent a
number which is less than one
unit? For instance, here is 1/2
of a unit. Is it possible or
not? The idea is that the, uh,
the answer is yes. We can
improve on correct numbering
system to support units less
than one unit. So it's kind of
subunit or sub sub units. And
the idea is this.
Introducing fraction to
the numbering system.
So assume that we have one unit
in any binding in any numbering
system. For instance, base two
base for base eight and etc.
Our example is based on the base
four, but you can generalize it
to any other basis.
Assume that we are in base four
and we have one unit of Earth.
Now we want to represent.
In a unit which is less than one
unit, I mean is sub unit. So the
idea is that if you are in base
4, you simply divide the unit by
4 section. And then one
subsection of this unit gonna be
1 unit out of four units.
So divide if you are in base 4
already is for you, just simply
divide 1 unit by 4, so 1 / 4 is
4 to the power of minus one. So
you see that now the powers are
not 01 or etc. The powers are
negative because it's it's a
Division 1 / 4.
And then if you want to
represent one subsection, you
have to add a symbol which is
called fraction point.
In decimal system we call this
decimal point, but in base four
we call it a fraction point or
in another. In general base
numbers. And any
general numbering
system we call this
fraction point. And we
say that one.
Subunits of four subunits, so
0.1 means that just one
unit out of four.
If you want to represent 2
units, two subunits.
So you have to simply increase
it by 1, so .1 becomes .2 in
base 4. But this means that
two subsection out of.
Four
subsections, so
2 * 1 / 4.
The next subunit gonna be.
Adding by one so .3.
Three subunits and then find.
Only four subunit which is equal
to 1 year at which one so .3
+ 1 becomes point 4.4 is just
one unit, so one.
So as you can see, four divide
multiply by 1 / 4 is equal to 4.
Multiplied by 4 to the power of
minus one, which is equal to 1.
This is the algorithm that we
can add to the anomic system to
support. Fraction of a unit.
So now if I want to be
more precise, you can have
01234. This is 4 in base 4.
Four and then.
Two subsection of a unit in base
form which is.
Two so 1 zero point 2.
In base 4.
4 units, +2 sub units.
If you need more precision, you
have to the same you have to
recursively follow the same
algorithm so subunits one
subunit divided by 4
subsections. So as you see here,
whenever you want to divide a
unit or subunit, we followed the
base number. We are in the base
four. We divide by 4 subsections
and now one subunit which is 1 /
4, another division by 4 which
becomes 1 / 16.
Or 4 to the power of minus 2.
So one sub sub unit is equal
to 4 to the power of minus
two in decimal system.
Here is this is represented as
.01 in base 4.
Two music, just two sub
subunits. So .0 and then from
the subunits 2 sub subunits.
Which is equal to 2 * 1 /
/ 16. In decimal system.
Three and then.
Four so when you reach when you
add 1 unit to the .03, if you
add 1 unit 1 sorry one sub sub
unit so becomes .01 it becomes.
One subunit.
So now you can have
more precision, so 012342
subunit and one sub subunit.
So 104 units.
.2 subunit and one
subservient. So this is the
precision in base 4.
If you see the decimal point
or any real number in decimal
system, they follow the exact
system in base 10 you divide
a unit by 10 subsection and
if you need more precision,
you divide each subsection by
10 sub subsections etc.
So.
For the fraction point,
basically if you are given some
positions, you assume that some
part is about fraction 4 and
some part is about integer part.
Call and we separate these two
positions based on a fraction
point. And remember, we don't
waste this position for the
fraction point. We assume that,
for instance, we could say that
the 1st four position is for
fraction and the other positions
are for integer part, so we
never waste a position for
fraction point. This is
determined by question or by
convention or etc.
And this is a number in base
four. This is the integer part,
and this is the fraction part.
The integer part has a
significant base on the powers
of four from 4 to the power of 0
up until 4 to the power of
positive numbers. The fraction
part has the significant, but
the significance are based on
the powers of four and the
powers are negative 4 -- 1 -- 2
up until the minus M.
So for instance, this number.
In base four, so the integer
part you have to multiply each
digit by the powers of four from
012 up until 78 positions in the
integer part. In the fraction
part, you have five position, so
you have to multiply each digit
by the negative powers of four.
So if you do that, multiply and
then some. So if you multiply 1
* 4 to 50 becomes one here 3 *
4 to power of two, because in
the third position and etc in
the fraction part, so 2 * 4 to
the power of minus one 0 * 4 to
power of minus two an, etc.
As you can see here.
And then you sum the fraction
part you come up with the
fraction decimal portion of the
number and then sum the integer
part to come up with the integer
decimal number. So this is the
decimal part and this is the
fraction form. So this number in
base four is equal to this
number in decimal system.
So basically you you do the
calculation for the integer
part separately and do the
calculation for fraction
part separately.
And again, we don't waste any
position for the fraction point.
And this is the general, uh,
formulation. So any
number in any base.
This part is exactly the same as
previous formulation, so integer
part the same each digit to the
powers of R.
From zero up until N -- 1.
And the numbers after the
fraction that they have to be
multiplied by the powers of R.
But the powers are negative
from minus one up until minus
M. If you are given M position
in the fraction plus in the
fraction part.
The same rule actually is
applied, so its digit must be
valid in that space number.
And I usually in the questions
or in the systems or in any
problems they say that how many
positions are reserved for the
fraction part of the number, how
many positions are reserved for
the integer part of the number?
And this is the math formula
to come to convert that
number to the base 10.
Ask any uninteresting question
with this. What's the minimum?
Now we have the fraction
parts. The minimum is just
putting the zero in all the
integer positions and putting
the zero in the old fraction
positions so it becomes 0.0
in decimal system.
The maximum number. The maximum
number for the integer part. The
same R to the power of N -- 1.
How about the fraction part? The
fraction part is the same. You
put the largest digit in all the
positions. If you are in this or
you put the R -- 1 in all the
positions. And then if you want
to see what's the largest number
in the decimal system, you have
to multiply these digits to the
powers of our, but negative
powers of four.
This is a left as Electra
Ciment, so you can think
about this. What's the
largest possible?
Fraction number given an
positions.
And the unit. This is important.
The unit here is not one yet. It
is a fraction unit. So the
smallest unit is just putting
the one in the rightmost
position and putting 0 in all
other positions. So in the
integer part, everything going
to be 0 in the fraction part you
start with zero up until the
last position which has one 1
multiplied by. R to the
power of minus M. This is
the smallest unit that
you increase the number.
So let's have some example of
this formula. So imagine we are
in radix two and we have integer
and fraction part.
So the integer part has four
positions. And the fraction part
has three positions.
So the minimum number is putting
zero in the integer positions
and putting zero in the fraction
positions, so it becomes 0.0
which is 0.
An in the right side you see the
decimal equal value of that
number. The next number is not
just putting one here because we
have fraction part, so we can.
I take I mean the smaller steps.
So the next number is just this
unit, so you put zero in all
positions upon sale.
The face. Position in the in the
rightmost position for the
fraction part, so you put one
here, at cetera, so this number
is just equal to 1 * 2 to the
power of minus three, which is 1
/ 8 which is equal to this.
So you see that in this
system, by giving free fraction
point, the smallest possible
step gonna be .0 point 125.
The next step is just adding
this number by one, so if you
add this number by one, you add
by, one becomes 1 + 1 two. So
Carrie goes here 1 + 0 becomes
one, so this is the next number.
Which is equal to 1 * 2 to the
power of minus 2.
As you can see here,
which is 0.25.
So if you do the same, you mean
increments by points.
125 So these are the next
numbers. For instance, this is
the next number in base for
base two, and then up until
here up until the one unit. So
you you pass these numbers up
until they one units. One unit
means that you put zero in
fraction part and you have one
in the integer part.
My question from you is this.
What's the Max in this system
given these spaces? I mean,
given the fraction positions and
the integer positions.
Based on the formula, we set
the Max number gonna be
putting the largest digit in
all positions, either the
fraction or the integer part.
Correct, Nick and Tatiana?
Yes, you put one in all the
positions.
So one in all position for
integer and one in all positions
for fraction point.
And then if you convert this to
the decimal system, so this is
15, you already saw that, but
the right side you have to
multiply each digit by the
powers of two, but negative
powers of two. So here I have
that. So this is the number.
111 in the fraction number,
so this is equal 2.875. So
this is the largest number
which is equal to 15.875 in
decimal system.
My next question is this.
Is it possible to represent this
number? Given this system.
I want to store the
information 1.02 in decimal
system in this binary system.
Are you do says that no, it's
not possible. The answer is
correct. Why this is not
possible to represent this?
Yes, actually Karen and you put
the correct answers as I said,
because of the three fraction
point we can our smallest step
to increment a number is just
.125. So after this we reach the
0.25. So if you want to
represent any number between
these two numbers, it is not
possible in this system.
So.
Gas is no because the
smallest number unit
of increment is this.
But I have to come up with a
solution for that. How can I? I
mean, because I have a for
instance, computer system that
has only three position for
fraction. At 4% for the integer,
but I want to represent this
number in this system.
I cannot do that, but what's
the solution? Possible
solution I can do?
What are the possible solutions?
Can you come up with a
solution to do that?
Rate export will see what, so
once one solution would be
changing the number system, for
instance from base two we go to
the base Freebase four, etc. Up
until base 10. At least we know
that we can represent this by
two fraction point in base 10.
But what if we cannot change the
rate? I mean the base number.
One possible solution is this
increase this size for the
fraction part. So we need more
precision because here the
precisions are between 1:25 or
125. So we need more position.
Or more precision so we can
introduce more fraction
positions here.
Which means that more fraction
position or more M.
This is 1 solution.
So if you increase the app,
you increase the significance
by two to the power of minus
four, 2 to the power of minus
five and etc. So you end up
with smaller, smaller, smaller
units and with those smaller
units it would be possible to
represent this number.
Another solution is that so the
question is how many position
you need. You have to add the
fraction part to represent this.
This is an interesting question.
But another solution is that as
a Tatiana said, rounding, but we
can accept some error and we
could say that we can find the
closest number to this number
and assume that that closest
number is this number.
So what are those closest
number? The closest number is
these two numbers either one.
Or the next number in the
system. The next number in this
system is 1.125.
So this is the binary number
one, and this is the next
pointer number. Give us three
positions. So given these two
numbers, if you calculate the
error. The first number, the
error. This is equal to 1 one
and we wanted to represent to
1.02. So the error is .02.
The second possible number is
this one point 125, but if you
do calculate the error, the
error is this. We choose the one
that has the smallest error
because the closest number is
desired. So we choose this. We
accept that there is an error,
but we store this information.
So instead of storing 1.0 two
we store 1000 one, .000 which
is actually equal to 1 and we
accept that there is an error
here.
We can do the same with base
four, so in base 4.
As as a Kevin said, one possible
solution is that increasing the
basis. So if you increase the
base, you see that the number at
the smallest increment step
gonna be here 0.01, etc.
And the largest digit is just
the largest number is just
putting the largest digit in all
positions, so would put in base
for. The largest is free. You
put three in all positions.
And this is the largest number.
So from zero and then 0.01 etc.
Up until this number.
And still in this number in
this space number you are
not able to represent 1.02.
And the reason is that.
You see that the increment from
zero to 0.015 and then the next
step is 0.03, so 0.2 is between
these two numbers, so this
system is not able to represent
this number. But the error is
much less. So if you find the
closest number, the error here
is much less.
And the number with the lowest
error is the I mean the desired
number to represent this number.
So I just wanted to.
Say that. Not all numbers can be
represented in any other basis,
so there sometimes you need to
compromise and introduce some
error when you want to represent
a number in another system into
a number in another number
system. So it converting between
the numbering system when they
have a fraction part.
Had some errors.
So I'm going to take your
questions and I'm going to open
my next slide.
So if you have any questions,
I'm happy to take your
question and then you can
continue with the next topic.
Yes, yes, Tianna asked that we
in what basis we represent the
error itself. Error is a number.
So in what basis we introduce
the error we represent there, we
usually represent the error in
decimal system. We said that
here is the error in conversion.
I just because we want to have
an understanding of what type of
error on what's, what's the size
of error, so that's yes. I mean,
usually we represent the error
whenever in the question they
ask for an error. You represent
the error in base 10.
Remember, sometimes when you
want to convert a numbers as we
want to discuss it right now,
you might end up with error in
French Space 4.
So you have to convert the
error from base four to the
base 10 and then put the
answer to the question.
Yes, yes, all the recordings and
lecture slides gonna be on
Blackboard by the end of today.
Any other questions?
So the next topic is.
Now we know that how.
Any number from base
R can go to base 10.
So basically using the those
formula that I explain right now
any integer part than any
fraction pile can be easily from
any base number. Or can it can
be easily go to the base 10.
But the question
is that how can I?
Generalize that idea to change
to convert from any basis to any
other basis other than base 10.
From base R to base our prime.
This is called conversion.
We already know how to
convert to base 10, but now
wanna explain more
conversion algorithms.
So this is the formula that
we convert any number from
base R to base 10.
So we'll start with the most
simplest algorithm to convert
from base 10 to base on. We know
how to convert from base R to
base 10. Now you want to see
from a decimal system we can
represent two base R. For
instance, we know that the
distance of moon to the sun is
12,000 in decimal system.
12,000 units of Earth.
What are we need? For instance,
seven position for the base four
to represent the number, but we
didn't know how to represent the
actual number. Or for
instance, I said that the
number 173 in binary system.
What's the number in?
Base 16 or base 64.
So we start with a given decimal
number and convert it to the any
base number from space. Two
binary system base eight octal
system and attach.
The idea is that.
We can assume that they are the
target. Binary system is still
10, so we want to convert from
decimal system to itself.
I want to explain this because
it gives an insight to us to
generalize that algorithm to
convert to any other basis.
So a number in decimal system
goes to the to itself this way.
So assume that we are
given this number.
In a decimal system.
So 30302131 and assume that
there is no fraction point here.
So if you want to convert it to
the decimal itself, it means
that extracting each digit.
So.
The first one is has the
significant 10 to the power of
0. The second one has a 10 to
the power of 1, etc.
So I could say that this
number if I want to extract
it digits in decimal system,
I have to simply extract the
digit in each position.
So basically the conversion
means that producing the digits
in the target system. So here I
want to convert this number in
decimal to the decimal. So I
have to extract the digits.
So this means that each time I
divide the given number by 10.
So if you divide this number by
10 it in it, extract one and
then the result. If you divide
the result by 10 it extracted
digits. So each division
by 10 reduced the powers
of 10 and extracted
digit of that position.
Up until the last.
So basically, if you are given
this number for the 1st digit,
you have to divide by 10.
And the quotient
is the number of.
So if you divide
this number, the.
The remainder, sorry. The
remainder is the digits.
As you can see here, and the
quotient is the remainder digits
of the number.
So for the 1st digit you divide
by 10 and you keep the
remainder, so the remainder of
the division is the 1st digit.
And then the next digit
gonna be the quotient
of previous division.
Divided by 10 and the remainder.
And then the quotient of
previous.
Division.
Divided by 10, you keep the
remainder as the next digit.
And then you continue. So
here I can show you that
this is the actual number
the First Division.
The First Division.
Gives the digits in the position
that has the significance of 10
to the power of 0.
So I put it here just to come up
with an algorithm so. 0 + 1
means that one division, so one
division gives the digit in the
position 10 to the power of 0.
Two division
the remainder gives the digit in
the position 10 to the power of
1. Free division.
Give the digits. The remainder
gives the digit for the position
10 to the power of 2.
An ETC so four division 4 --
1 three so it gives the
digit for the position 10 to
the power of 3.
An, etc. So as you can see
here, if you want it Bridget
in the position that has.
Significance of 10 to the power
of N you have to divide. We have
to divide N + 1 times.
As you can see here.
So up until the last digit. So
for the digital 10 to the power
of 7, the position in at 8.
At the eighth position, you have
to do division eight times.
And then these are the digits
that you produce. You have to
just put the remainder back.
In the reverse order.
So a number in decimal system
can you can extract digits in
each position by multiple
division by 10.
And then put the remainder in
the reverse order.
So. We want to see how it is
possible in 16. So you have to
simply do the division this time
by 16 because you want to
extract digits in base 16.
So.
The given number by 16. The
remainder is the 1st digit.
The second division
is the 2nd digit.
The third division is this 3rd
digit an, etc.
So you see that.
You just the reminders are the
digits. And then when you reach
the quotient, 0 means that
further division just produce
zero you stop.
And then you put the digits in
the reverse order, so one is
the basic history is the 1st
digit, 11 is the 2nd digit.
Annetta. Or you put the
remainder in the reverse
order.
However, in base 1612, fourteen,
15, and 11 or not a valid
digits, you have to represent
them with the valid digit in
base 16, so.
Based on the valid digits
for these values, you have
to substitute the, I mean
the correct alphabet.
So. 12 is equal to equal
to 11 F is equal to 15
an etc based on the base
16 system and this is
the number in base 16.
In any basis, basically you have
to just simply divide by that
base number and put there.
Changes in the reverse
order. That's the
algorithm very simple.
Question is this number in base
8 multiple division by 8 and
then put the remainder in the
reverse order? So this was the
number in base 10 and then we
come up with this time in base
16 and this is the number in
base eight as you see here. When
we reduce the base number, there
is a need for more permission.
In base 4, multiple division by
4:00 and then put the remainder
in the reverse order. So you see
this number is equal to this
number in base 4.
Base 2 multiple division by
two and then put the
remainder in the reverse
order.
You see that this number
reduced the base number.
More spaces increase the
base number less space.
So. In any basis, you have
to simply just divide by R
and put the remainder in the
reverse order.
So I'm done with the topic today
so we can continue. We are
running out of time. You can
continue the conversion in the
next lecture, which gonna be
next week and I'm happy to take
your question now.
No, never actually 1 interesting
question is this.
Uh.
Nick asked that will then the
remainder ever be out of the
target system? Uh.
Even in the best 16 that we come
up with, all the remains. If you
divide any number by, for
instance, any number M by any
number N always, the remainder
is less than N.
This is the math. I mean a
fact that if you divide any
number by a number M always
the remainder is between
the zero up until that.
That number that you divide by.
So if you divide any number by
16 always the remainder is
between zero up until 15.
However, in base 16 the digits
for the 10 up until 15 or
alphabet. So you have to just
simply replace that.
So that's a math fact that,
uh, if you divide any number,
for instance by 20, always
the remainder gonna be
between zero up until 19.
Since you can set a.
If we want to go from, let's
say, base free to base 20, that
will discuss that. So 11
immediate solution is this. If
you want to go from two base two
to base 16.
So you know how to go from base
two to 10 an now you know that
house. We go from 10 to, for
instance 16. So basically you
have to do this. So this is the
topic of next lecture so.
Here if you go from a base R to
base our prime, you have to
mediate that conversion through
the decimal system. So you have
to convert or to the 10 and then
convert base 10 number to the
base. Our prime you know this by
the algorithm that we explained.
I mean by just multiplying each
digit to the significant of that
position and some together, and
now you know this.
You have to multiply. You have
to divide the number, but I
prime multiple times and put the
remainder in the reverse order.
So for any base R2 anyways, our
prime you have to mediated
through the decimal system.
Oh, you just put the when you do
the division as you see here
when you, for instance, here,
you divide by two, you divide by
two. You keep the quotient for
the next division and you put
the remainder as the digit.
So the remainder is always the
digit of the target system.
So you don't have to only the in
base, for instance those bases
that have more than 10 digits
they represent by alphabet. You
just have to simply replace the
alphabet with the.
A reminder.
So let me back to functions here
by divided by 4. Always
recommended is between zero and
three, so all the reminders are
valid digits, so you just Simply
put the actual remainder as the
digit in the reverse order.
But in the base, all bases that
are more than 10 because they
have digits, which our alphabet
font size 10 is a 11 is B and
etc. Although the remainder
might become 1011 etc. At the
last step you have to replace it
by the alphabet.
Process here.
This division, sorry this
division by 16, has a remainder
11. So you put 11 as the for now
as the digit, but.
Finally, you have
to replace it by P.
So you do the division first and
then you put the digits in the
reverse order and then finally
check that the digits are the
valid digit in the base number
or not. This happens only for
bases that are more than 10
because for the 1011 etc they
have ABC as the digit.
Yes, yes all this stuff gonna be
posted on Blackboard.
Also, I'm going to be on the
office hour after this
lecture, so if you have any
other questions I'm happy to
take your question there.
And yeah, also, I put the
whole lecture slides so you
can cover other type of I
mean conversion to be ready
for the next lecture.
So thank you so much, all of you
and have a great day guys.
It's gonna be our next topic.
Thank you though. Thank you
Jaxon. And have a great day.